

--- Page 1 ---

6 The Golden Age of the Guptas 
The rise of the Guptas marked a significant turning 
point in Indian history, bringing stability and unity to 
northern India. Although the Gupta Empire covered 
smaller geographic area than the Mauryan Empire, 
it is often considered more stable and enduring. The 
dynasty was founded by Srigupta, a minor chief, who 
laid the foundation for the Imperial Age of the Guptas, 
a remarkable period of progress that spanned about two 
dynasty. Various sources, both literary and archaeological, 
provide knowledge and information about the Gupta 
(A) Literary Sources Fe-koy-kot 
) Fa-hein's Account-Fa-hien, a Chinese 
Buddhist pilgrim, visited India during the reign 
of Chandragupta II (Vikramaditya). During his 
pilgrimage, he travelled to Mathura, Kannauj, 
Kapilavastu, Kushinagar, Vaishali, Pataliputra, Kashi, 
and Rajagriha. Although his primary interest was 
in Buddhism, he wrote extensively about the Gupta 
king, his administration, and the social, economic, and 
religious conditions of India during the Gupta period. 
According to Fa-Hien: SOURCES 
Magadha was a prosperous region with large 
towns and a wealthy population. 
Pataliputra was a flourishing city with 
numerous charitable institutions, including a 
hospital funded by benevolent citizens. 
The people, despite their wealth, led simple lives 
and generally adhered to Buddhist principles. 
Vaishnavism, Shaivism, Buddhism, and 
Jainism were the main religions, and people 
lived harmoniously without ill will toward 
other sects. 
Hindu gods and goddesses were depicted on 
coins, as well as in sculptures and paintings. 
The penal code was mild, with most offences 
punishable by fines. 
ICSE History and Civics -IX centuries from the carly fourth century CE. 
With fertile lands in castern Uttar Pradesh and 
Bihar and an abundance of iron ore in Central 
India, the Gupta Empire thrived cconomically, 
fostering remarkable ad vancements in Iiterature. 
art, architecture, science, and culture. This era is 
celebrated as the "golden age" of Indian history for 
its cultural and intellectual achievements. 
Fa-hein 
(2) Literary Wo rks of Kalid asa and 
Vishakhadatta The writing of various authors, 
especially of Kalidasa and Vishakhadatta have proved 
very useful regarding the Gupta rulers and the state 
of society under them. Kalidasa's masterpiece is 
the play Abhijanasakuntalam. Vishakhadatta's Devi 
Chandraguptam, a Sanskrit play describes the early 
life of Chandragupta II. 
(3) The PuranasThe Puranas, especially the 
Vayu Purana, give some very useful information 
regarding the Gupta dynasty. 
(B) Archaeological Sources 
(1) The Allahabad Pillar Inscription--The 
most important source of information regarding 
Samudragupta is the inscription found on the Ashokan 
Pillar, which stands in the Allahabad fort. This 
inscription, also known as the Prayaga Prashasti, 
was written in Sanskrit by Harisena. He was the 
123 

--- Page 2 ---

court poet of Samudragupta. It provides a firsthand 
knowledge of Samudragupta's reign. It describes the 
of kings and tribal republics that were conquered by 
Samudragupta. Highlighting the importance of this 
inscription one historian has rightly remarked, "Upon 
this single rcord ress the name and fame of the real 
founder of the Gupta Empire. reign of the Guptas and provides an impressive list of these coins provides us uscful informalion regar 
Allahabad Pillar 
(2) The Iron Pillar of Chandra at Mehrauli 
The inscription, that is found written on the famous 
Iron Pillar which stands near the Qutab Minar, 
is a valuable source of information regarding 
Chandragupta II and his reign. Very useful 
information about Chandragupta II's conquests is 
derived from this inscription. 
(3) Many Other Inscriptions-In addition to the 
above two main inscriptions, various other inscriptions 
have also been found that throw an important light 
on the Gupta dynasty. Of all these inscriptions those 
found at Basarh, Udaygiri and Sanchi have proved 
very useful regarding Chandragupta II, while the Eran 
inscription throws some useful light on Skandgupta. 
Chandragupta I (319/320- 335 CE) 
124 (4) Coins-A 
The early history of the Gupta dynasty's first two 
rulers, Sri Gupta and his son Ghatotkacha, is largely 
unknown. Their successor, Chandragupta I, emerged 
as the dynasty's first prominent ruler, adopting the 
itle Maharajadhiraja, or "the king of kings". He period have been found from n various sites. A 
the artistic achievements, economic 
coondition personal accomplishments of 
They sometimes solve many chronological 
regarding the Gupta dynasty. the Gupta 
h(5) Nalanda University : It was the 
renowned educational institution of ancient 
located at Nalanda near Rajagriha in Bihar. 
founded during the reign of Kuumargupta 
middle of the 5h century CE. Hiuen Tsang has 
gve a lot of information about Nalanda in his 
accountg 
Nalanda University provided various 
facilihi 
to the students for their studies. There were hity great libraries called Ratnasagar, Ratnadadhi 
Ratnaranjak. The subjects of study at Nalanda 
all the four Vedas, logic, grammar, medicine 
works of different Buddhist schools. 
DB 
POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS Ruins of Nalanda University 
Thus, a great deal of historical material 
available about the Gupta dynasty. In fact, with h 
coming of the Gupta period, we find ourselves on in 
grounds due to the availability of historical materi 
of great variety. 
strengthened his rule through a strategic mamy 
to the Lichchhavi princess Kumaradevi, an allu 
celebrated on gold coins issued during his reig 
Under Chandragupta I's leadership. the G 
Empire expanded to include Magadha (S0 
Bihar), Prayag (Prayagraj), Saketa (Ayodhya, 
ICSE History and Cvics 

--- Page 3 ---

surrounding regions, His reign marked the beginning 
of the Gupta Era and significantly enhanced the 
dynasty 's power and prestige. 
Samudragupta (335 -375 CE) 'Befy 
Chandragupta 1 I was succeeded by his illustrious 
son and one of the ablest kings of ancient India, 
Samudragupta. In the north, he extended his empire 
up to the Chambal River after defeating the Naga 
Kings of Mathura, Gwalior, and Ahichhatra. His 
most important military exploit was his Deccan 
campaign. He covered a long distance of 3,000 
miles through dense forests with the same boldness 
as that of Alexander l and Napoleon. While marching 
towards the south, he defeated several powerful rulers 
including some confederacies. However, he did not 
annex any portion of the Deccan, as it would make 
his empire too big to i rule. He felt content to make 
the southern kings accept his suzerainty, showing that 
he was a wise statesman. 
Samudragupta playing the Veena 
Samudragupta is said to have subjugated the 
forest tribes dwelling Central India and defeated 
nine republican tribes of Rajasthan. The five 
trontier states (1) Samtata or modern Bengal, 
2) Devaka or modern North Assam, (3) Kamrup 
or Assam, (4) Nepal, and (5) Kartarpur or modern 
Terat Region accepted his suzerainty and paid him 
beavy tributes. He maintained friendly relations with 
heighbouring states like the Shakas, the Kushanas, the 
hahis of Punjab, and the king of Sri Lanka, Megha 
Vertnan. Some of these rulers also paid him tributes. tiN because of his great military exploits that atmudragupta is generally compared with Napoleon. 
and Civics IX His empire extended fromn the Brahmaputra in the 
cast to the Yamnuna and Chambal rivers in the west 
and from the Himalayas in the north to the Narmada 
in the south. 
The Allahabad Pillar Inscription of Samudragupta 
provides valuable insights into his conquests and 
policies. It categoriscs rulers into four groups based 
on his dealings with them: 
1. Rulers of Aryavarta: Nine rulers were 
defeated, and their kingdoms were incorporated into 
Samudragupta's empire. 
2. Rulers of Dakshinpatha (South India): Twelve 
rulers, after being defeated, surrendered to hím but were 
allowed to rule their kingdoms as subordinate allies. 
3. Neigh bouring States: States such as Assam, 
Coastal Bengal, Nepal, and several gana sanghas 
(Republics) in the northwest paid tribute, obeyed his 
orders, and attended his court. 
4. Outlying Rulers: Kings of distant regions 
submitted to him, offering tributes and matrimonial 
alliances. 
An Estimate of Samudragupta 
Samudragupta's court poet Harisena records that 
he performed an Ashvamnedha Yajna (horse sacrifice) 
to assert his sovereignty. He was a great conqueror 
and rightly deserves to be called the Indian Napoleon. 
He was also a great patron and lover of art and 
literature. He himself was a great musician and 
an expert Veena player. Some of his coins feature 
artistic descriptions of him playing the Veena. He was 
an accomplished scholar and a poet of high order. 
Samudragupta was a follower of Hinduism, but his 
greatness lies in the fact that he was equally tolerant 
towards other religions. In conclusion, Samudragupta 
was a versatile genius and possessed exceptional 
qualities of head and heart. 
Coin of Samudragupta 
125 

--- Page 4 ---

4Chandragupta ll (375/380-415 CE) 
Chandragupta Il succeeded his fther, Samudragupta, and expanded the Gupta Empire through conquest. He annexed the territories of tthe Sakas in Malwa, Gujaral, 
and Saurashtra, caming the title 'Shakari (Conqueror of the Sakas). This annexation added wealth and fertile 
provinces to the empire, providing access to westen ports such as Broach, Cambay, and Sopara, which enhanced trade with Europe via Egypt. His empire stretched from the Brahmaputra River in the cast to the Chenab River in the west, and from the Himalayas in the north to the Namada River in the south. 
Chandragupta II 
(Vikramaditya) 
Chandragupta II also used matrimonial alliances 
to strengthen his rule. His marriage to Kuberanaga of the Naga family and his daughter Prabhavati's 
marriage to Vakataka ruler Rudrasena II extended 
Gupta influence into the Deccan. 
During his reign, the Chinese pilgrim Fa-Hien 
visited India, providing insights into the life and 
conditions of the time. Chandragupta issued gold 
coins, some depicting him slaying a lion with the 
The Gupta period marked a shift from the 
centralised Mauryan administration to a decentralised 
system. The Chinese pilgrim Fa-Hien praised the 
Gupta administration for its mild and liberal nature, 
with lenient punishments, low crime rates, safe roads, 
and honest officials. Land revenue, one-fourth of the 
produce, was the primary source of income. Local 
128 itle Sinha-ikrana' 
ikramaditya' (or "Sun of Power') 
Coins of Chandragupta Il period 
His court included the famous Nav 
Ratna 
succceded by Kumaragupta, during whose as Kalidasa, Varahamihira, and 
Amarsimha, 
Hunas first invaded India. Skandagupta, his defeated the Hunas, securing pcace for 
S0 year 
Chronology of Gupta rulers and others 
2. Chandragupta I 1. Sri Gupta Late 3rd I Century CE 
(Found 
5. Kumara Gupta I bearing he 
3. Samudragupta 335 -375 CE 
6. Skanda Gupta 
7. Puru Gupta 4. Chandragupta II375/380 -415 CE 
(Vikramaditya) 
(Baladitya) 319/320 -335 CE 
THE GUPTA ADMINISTRATION 415  455 CE 
455  467 CE 
467  473 CE 
8. Kumara Gupta II -473  476 CE 
9. Buddha Gupta 476  495 CE 
10. Narasimha Gupta 495  530 CE 
11. Kumara Gupta III 530 -540 CE 
12. Vishnu Gupta Chandraditya 540 -550 (E 
kings and chiefs, called feudatories, ruled mut 
the empire, while the imperial Gupta rulers adif 
grand titles like parameshvara and maharajadh 
Monarchy was the prevailing form of govem 
and kings were considered divine, compared t0 
like Vishnu and Indra. 
ICSE History and CivCS 

--- Page 5 ---

(AFGHANISTAN) 
(PAKISTAN) 
ARABIAN SEA 
(INDIA) LAKSHDWEEP Kabul 
abh 
Hstory and Civics -IX rRandnsa AuDHE Y 
/IndrpresheC Mathura 
ARUNAYANAS 
Structure of Central Administration Meratf 
Regional and Local Administration AALAVAS 
saure 
Ujan Bh aru Kachh 
Tapi Era Prayag Kashr 
Krishna Godavari 
Cauvery 
INDIAN Sanchi upnath 
Mahanadi armnada 
The Mantri-Parishad, mentioned by poet Kalidasa, 
included high-ranking officials like the kumaramatyas 
and the sandhivigrahika (minister of peace and 
war), These officers handled military, fiscal, and 
administrative duties, including land transactions and 
tax collection. Taxes were collected in kind, although 
wealthier peasants often paid in cash. Civil officerS, 
such as Amatyas and Kumaramatyas, undertook 
military responsibilities and were often promoted to 
higher ranks. Kanh 
Sarnath 
The empire was divided into bhuktis, governed 
by an uparika, and further subdivided into vishayas, 
managed by a vishayapati. Villages were administered 
oy headmen, with the consent of local elites for land 
transactions and other important matters. Towns were 
herseen by committees of five, supported by guilds SAI 
LANKA UNDER CHANORAGUPTA B VKRAMADITVAS 
(INOIA IN 412 GE) THE GUPTA EMPIRE 
(TIBE T) RUENMAr Prosent internatiorat Boundaries 
Va 
OCEAN Gaya and Mocdern Naes 
1 he Gupta Empiro 
BAY 
OF pANG 
BENGAL 
Map : Gupta Empire under Chandragupta II (Vikramaditya) INDIA 
ANDS ANDIA) mpura 
ANDAMAN 
AND 
N 
NICOBA (BURMAy 
of artisans and merchants, with officers like the 
purapala managing their affairs. 
Transition to Feudal Governance 
The Gupta administration exhibited a gradual 
devolution of state authority. Key functions such as tax 
collection, law enforcement, and agriculture regulation, 
once centralised, were increasingly delegated to the 
priestly and warrior classes. This decentralisation marked 
a transition towards a feudal system, distinguishing it 
from the centralised governance of the Mauryan Empire. 
Society :A Highly ldeal and Moral Society 
Fa-hien's account reveals that people were rich 
and prosperous and donated to religious and charitable 
causes, such as setting up rest houses and hospitals. 
They were honest and law-abiding. Mostly, people 
were vegetarian except for the Chandalas who lived 
outside the towns and were treated as untouchables. 
All the other castes lived in harmony. 
127 

--- Page 6 ---

Religion : Full Religious Toleration 
The Gupta kings practised Hinduism and under their patronage, Hinduism flourished significantly. The Guptas worshipped Lord Vishnu. They also performed religious sacrifices. The Gupta kings gave liberal donations for building temples. The Brahmanas were held in high esteem. They laid emphasis on the devotion of Vishnu through prayers and hymns. Like that of Buddhism, images of gods and goddesses (like Shiva, Shakti and Vishnu) began to be worshipped. For their worship, special rooms, called 'Deva-grihas' were constructed in temples. The 'avatara cult related to Lord Vishnu also became 
Gupta rulers were not only great generals and able administrators but also patrons of art and literature. Under them, India saw advancement in all the fields of culture literature, science, sculpture, fine arts etc., as it had not seen before. That is why their period is regarded as a 'Golden Period in the History of Ancient India. 
Advancement in the Field of Literature 
This period is particularly renowned for advancement in literature. Sanskrit saw its revival during this period. 
Sanskrit became more prominent in Gupta times, 
especially in the courts and classical literature, while 
Pali was still widely used in Buddhist scriptures. 
Many great poets, dramatists, grammarians and 
scholars lived in the period. The chief among them 
were the following: CULTURAL DEVELOPMENTS 
1. Kalidasa : He was the greatest poet and 
playwright of this age. He is often referred to as the 
Shakespeare of India'. He wrote several poems and 
drama in Sanskrit which are considered the gems of 
literature. His great skill in lyrical poetry is exhibited 
in his poems Meghaduta and Ritusamhara while 
Kumarasambhava and Raghuvamsha are his two 
great epics. Kalidasa's plays have also been translated 
into various languages of the world. The most 
important among them are Abhijnanshakuntalam, 
Vikramorvashi and Malavikagnimitra. 
128 popular. The people began to 
sometimes comes to this earth in the form being to climinate vices and establish 
VIrues. Though the Gupta rulers practised 
Hind it goes to their credit that they showed religious tolerance by donating money for 
bu places of worship for other r religions. No 
discrimity was practised in giving high government no persons of ability. believe that 
From Fa-hien's account We come \o know Buddhism was still flourishing in Punjab, 
Beng Mathura. Buddhists and Hindus COeXIsted 
Kalidasa 
2, Vishakhadatta : He was a great playwn 
who wrote two great historical plays Mudrarak 
and the Devi Chandraguptam. Mudrarakshasa ort 'Seal of Rakshasa' is the story of the circumstane 
that led to the accession of Chandragupta Maurai 
the throne of Magadha. 
3. Shudraka : He wrote the famous 
Mrichchhakatikam or the Clay Cart' which s 
great source of information about the socio-qultu 
conditions of that period. 
4. Other Poets, Dramatists and Playwr 
Among the other great poets and playwTgs 
this period were Harisena who wrote the tau 
poem praising the valour of his patron Emy 
Samudragupta. It is a gem of Sanskrit poetry whd 
inscribed on the Allahabad Pillar. Bharavi and D 
were also great poets and playwrights. Kiratarji 
of Bharavi describes the battle between Aju 
Pandava hero, and Lord Shiva, disguised a 
ICSE History and CivCS 

--- Page 7 ---

Bhasa Wrote e 13 plays, of which Svapana-lasavdatta 
or the Dream of Princess Vasavadatta' and Pratigva 
Jogandhana are the nost popular. Ravana ladha or 
the Assassination of Ravana written by Bhatti is 
also a masterpicce of literature. 
Dandin was also a versatile writer, and his 
Dashkumarcharita describes the adventures of ten 
princes in lucid prose. These adventures provide us 
a lot of information about the social condition of that 
period. 
During the Gupta period, the Sanskrit grammar 
was systematised by the efforts of grammarians 
1:ke Patanj ali and lexicographers such as Amar 
Sinch. Patanjali's Mahabhashya and Amar Singh's 
Jmarkosha are the most celebrated works of its kind. 
Panchatantra, a collection of animal stories, in 
vhich animals and birds play the parts of kings, 
ministers and common men, is full of wit and humour. 
It is said that Vishnu Sharma wrote these fables to 
preach the art of statecraft to disinterested princes. 
Subsequently, these fables were adopted as Aesops 
Fables. Another book Brihat Katha by Gunadhya 
became the basis of 'Sindbad the Sailor'. 
Advancement in the Field of Science 
The science of medicine, mathematics and 
astronomy reached great heights during the Gupta 
period. 
Medicine : Vaghbhatta was the most distinguished 
physician of this period. He wrote his famous treatise 
Ashtangahridaya Samhita and continued the tradition 
of Charaka. In this period, surgeons performed 
operations of cataract, etc. Dhanavantari was also a 
great physician whose name has become synonymous 
with Ayurveda. Astanga-Sangraha, Charaka-Samhita 
and Sushruta Samhita were other important works on 
Ayurveda. Sushruta was the first surgeon of ancient 
India. Charaka was a great physician who taught at 
Taxila during the reign of Kanishka. 
Sushruta: Sushruta wrote Sushruta Samhita, 
considered to be one of the most important treatises 
on medicine. This treatise explains all aspects ot general medicine including detailed account 2 surgery. Sushruta is called father of plastic 
rgery'. Sushruta had a number of disciples who 
SE History and Civics -IX were required to study for 6 years before beginning 
surgical training. He would instruct students to 
practise cutting on vegetables or dead animnals to 
perfect the length and depth of an incision. Sushruta's 
medical prowess is exhibited through his writings 
on rhinoplasty, involving nasal reconstructions using 
skin from paticnt's check or forchead. 
Charak Sushruta 
Mathematics_ and Astronomy : The greatest 
mathematicians and astronomers of this period were 
Aryabhatta, Varahamihira and Brahmagupta. By this 
time, Indian mathematics had already discovered 
the decimal system and the use of zero which were 
later borrowed by Arabs from India. Aryabhatta, 
in this famous book Aryabhattiyam, deals with the 
rules of solving problems of Algebra, Geometry and 
Trigonometry. He even calculated the exact value of 
T (pi) which was equal to 3.1416 and formulated 
how to find the area of a triangle. Aryabhatta's other 
book, Surya Siddhanta, proves that the earth revolves 
round the sun and rotates on its axis. In this way, 
he discovered the causes of the Solar and the Lunar 
eclipses. He also measured by speculation the exact 
circumference of the earth. 
Varahamihira's celebrated work is known 
as Brihat Samhita. It deals with mathematics, 
astronomy, botany and physical geography. He 
stated that the moon moves round the earth and the 
earth together with the moon, moves round the sun. 
He also worked out the movement of the planets. His 
other works are Panch Siddhantika, Brihad Jataka 
and Laghu Jataka. 
Brahmagupta was also a great mathematician. 
His work Brahmashutika Siddhanta is composed in 
verse form. He hints at the law of gravitation. 
129 

--- Page 8 ---

Beuptue and Fne Arts 
In he held of Scalpture India made sgnificant ogress ler the Cptas leading to the deeline of Candhara art The iupta sculptres show an qte bety f executis and a high degree of kill Boh the at nd the subiects chosen became onpletely Indian n their harcter The discovery of & large number of mages and sculptures at Sarsath and various other places shows that besides depeting cenes from Buddha's life, now subjects from Puransc mythology had also begun to be treated wih remarkable freshness. 
Bronze Statue of Buddha 
CONTRIBUTIONS IN RIITECTVE 
The Gupta period also saw great advancement in 
the field of Architecture. Numerous beautiful tenmples 
with the Shikhara were built during this period. The 
stone temple at Deogarh (near Jhansi) and the brick 
temple at Bhitrigaon (near Kanpur) are two fine 
specimens of the period. The first contains some fine 
pieces of sculpture on the panels of its walls and 
the second is known for its well-designed figures in 
terracotta. 
The Vishnu temple at Deogarh marked a transition 
from early flat-roofed temples to the later style of 
building a Shikhara or a tower over the shrine of 
the Chief deity (Garbhagriha). This temple is erected 
on a platform accessible by a flight of steps. This 
platform is decorated with sculptures depicting scenes 
from the lives of Rama and Krishna, A remarkable 
figure shows Hanuman carrying the whole hill. 
130 Not only this, three of the finest Aant Asigned by the histornans to the C Cupta peod, illustrate the great advancement hat the p made in the field of archhitecture They 
eve ut of olid rocks and display a high skill 
The Dashavatara Temple, Deogarh, shovn Lord Vishnu as Sheshashayi 
coils of Sheshanaga 
Paintings sleeping sa 
Brick Temple at Bhitargaon 
The art of painting reached its height of p 
and splendour during the Gupta Age. The speuit 
of the Gupta paintings are found at Ajanta 
the Bagh caves. The best specimens of the Gu 
paintings are represented by the beautiful fres 
ICSE History and Civics 

--- Page 9 ---

found in the Ajanta caves. These frescoes are so 
excellent in their design and technical skill that 
tourists from all over the world especially come to 
see them. The words of a Danish artist are worth 
mentioning in this connection. 
A Specimen of an Ajanta Painting 
(Bodhisatva Avalokiteshvara) 
According to him, "They represent the climax 
which the genuine Indian art has attained. Everything 
in these pictures from the composition as a whole 
to the smallest pearl or flower testifies the depth of 
insight coupled with the greatest technical skill.'" 
These frescoes of the Ajanta caves are accomplished 
in execution and beautiful in form and colour. 
Perhaps the figure of Avalokiteshvara Padmapani 
is the best known single figure from Ajanta found in 
Cave No. 1. This figure is as much known for its 
colours and designs as for its expression. The face of 
the figure clearly reflects compassion and tenderness 
which is characteristic of Padmahari whose main 
mission is to relieve human beings by taking upon 
himself the sorrows of the earthly beings. The figure 
8 set in quite a natural setting. It is surrounded by 
Gandharvas, Yakshas, Apsaras and other celestial 
eings, animals (like monkeys) and trees (like palm 
Pees). The head-dressing or jewelled crown, necklace 
nd white lotus in the right hand, all add much 
Nre to the whole scene. especially to the figures of Ttmahari or the Lotus-Bearer. 
and Civics -IX The paintings in Bagh Caves (Madhya Pradesh) 
are simnilar to those of Ajanta. They have same varicty 
of designs, vigorous execution, decorative qualíty and 
secular nature. The scene depicting a procession of 
clephants and a lovely scene of a dancer and woman 
musicians are very impressive compositions. 
Metal Casting or Metallurgy 
The art of casting metals reached a high degree 
of development during the Gupta age. The Iron 
Pillar at Delhi, near the Qutab Minar, reveals the 
metallurgical skill of the Gupta artists. It has been 
exposed to sun, rain and storms for centuries yet it 
has not rusted. One may wonder how the ancient 
Indians were able to cast such a massive and heavy 
pillar in the 5h century CE. 
Iron Pillar at Mehrauli 
This pillar has a special historical importance 
of its own. This pillar bears the inscription of one 
Chandra who has been identified by the historians 
as Chandragupta Vikramaditya. It is believed 
that this iron pillar was erected by Kumargupta I 
to commemorate the achievements of his father 
Chandragupta Vikramaditya. 
The copper statue of Buddha in Nalanda is 
part of the Sultanganj Buddha statue, which is 2.5 
metre tall and weighs over 500 kilograms is the best 
specimen of the art of casting copper statues. The 
Gupta coins display a high artistic value too. They 
issued a large number of gold coins. 
Education 
India made great progress in the field of education 
during the Gupta period. In addition to the existence 
131 

--- Page 10 ---

of a large number of Pathsalas or high schools there 
were many universities like Nalanda, Taxila, Sarnath 
and Ajanta which were ever busy for imparting 
higher cducation to the 'sisvas' or students. Students 
from all parts of India and from many foreign 
countries flocked to these universities receive higher cducation. These educational institutions w by the grants of land and charities of the public. It was during the Gupta period 
achievements. foundation of the Nalanda University was \aid w later on achieved great heights. 
THE LESSON AT A GLANCE 
" Sources : (A) Literary Sources--Fa-Hien's Account, Literay works of Kalidasa and Visakhadatta, thhe Purara (B) Archaeological Sources-The Allahabad Pillar Inscription, the Iron Pillar of Chandra at Mehra Delhi. Many other inscriptions and coins etc. 
e Golden Age : The Gupta period is known as the 'Golden Age' of Indian history for its cultural and intle 
" Rulers : Chandragupta I: The first prominent Gupta ruler, strengthened power through marriage alliances, a, expanded the empire to Prayag and Saketa, making the Gupta Era's beginning. 
Samudragupta Defeated the Naga Kings of Mathura, Gwalior and Ahichhatra. His Deccan Campaign made ta as great a conqueror as Alexander and Napoleon. He covered 3000 miles, conquered every powerful 
Soute state, did not annex the kingdoms, made them accept his suzerainty. Defeated nine republican tribes 
of Pajaste and 5 frontier states of (a) Devaka (modern North Assam); (b) Kamrup or Assam; (c) Samtara (modern Beng (d) Nepal and (e) Kartarpur (modern Terai region) accepted his suzerainty. 
Chandragupta Il A powerful ruler -Conquered Shakas of Malwa, Gujarat and Saurashtra. Empire included B. 
Cambay and Sopara  important ports. Fa-Hien a great Chinese scholar--visited India during his reio 
left a vivid account of India. 
" The Gupta Administration : According to Fa-hien, mild, liberal, no crimes, divided into provinces, 1/4th nro 
of land the main source of income. Highly ideal and moral society. Religious toleration followed. 
" Cultural Developments: Great strides in literature, science, fine arts and architecture known as the G 
Period' of Ancient India. 
Literature : Great poets, dramatists, scholars and grammarians lived in this period. 
() Kalidasa  Great poet of this age. Wrote 'Meghaduta', Ritusamhara'. Epics like 'Kumarasambhava an 
'Raghuvamsha'. Great plays 'Abhijnanshakuntalam', 'Malvikagnimitra' and Vikramorvasiya'. 
(ii) Vishakhadatta Wrote the plays 'Mudrarakshasa' and 'Devi Chandra Gupta'. 
(ii) Shudraka  VWrote 'Mrichchhakatikam' or the Clay Cart, which throws light on socio-cultural conditions 
that period. 
(iv) Other Poets, Dramatists -Harisena, Bhasa, Dandin, Bhatti. 
Patanjali's 'Mahabhashya' and Amarsingh's 'Amarkosha' are the most celebrated works on Grammar. Panchtart 
by Vishnu Sharma a collection of animal stories. 
.Advancement in Science : (0) Medicine Vaghbhatta, the most distinguished physician, continued the trad 
of Charaka. 'Charak Samhita', 'Sushruta Samhita' and 'Astanga Sangraha' are great works on Ayurveda. 
(i) Mathematics and Astronomy  Great names of this period. Aryabhatta, Varahamihira and Brahmag 
Discovered the decimal system, and the use of zero. Aryabhatta's, "Aryabhatta' deals with rules ot Ag 
Geometry and Trigonometry. Surya-Siddhanta' is other book proves that the earth revolves round the su 
rotates on its axis. 
Varahamihira's 'Brihat Samhita' deals with mathematics, astronomy, botany and physical 9eoye 
Brahmagupta hints at law of gravitation in his book, 'Brahmashutika Siddhanta'. 
1 Soure of Avalokiteshvera Padmapani. 6 Sculpture and Fine Arts : Great studies made in sculpture. Completely Indian in form and character. No 
ntiuence. Images and sculptures at Sarnath are the best examples. Best known single figure in Ajanta, Cave N 
ICSE History and CivCS 

--- Page 11 ---

Avchitecture : A number of beautitu temles with the hahare Deoge (ne an bk m 
(near Kanpur) are two fine specimens 
Paintings : The beautiful frescoes at Ajanta Caves are the finest warnples of his art Ecntlont dnig or 
k famous al over he world. The Bagh Caves in Madhya Pradesh, sirmitar to Ajarta Gaves 
hetal Casting or Metaturgy : The Iron Plar at Delhi near Qutab Minar reveais the skil of the Gupts afts 
as not been rusted Buiit in 5th century CE, it isa marvef of engineering The copper statu of Budha atbout 
5metre high, is another specimen of this art Gupta coins were highty artistic too 
rducation : Universities like Nalanda and Taxila, Sarnath and Ajanta flourished in this period Stuantis from st 
er the worid flocked to themn. These universities reached great heights in imparting education 
ELUL TIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS 
1. Which of the following statements is/are correct regarding Allahabad pillar inscription? 
() It is inscribed on an Ashokan pillar 
(ii) It was composed by Harisena 
3. Choose the incorrect pair. (i) It describes the reign of Samudragupta, glorifies his conguests and achievements 
(a) Only (1) (b) (). (G1) 
2. Who is referred to as the Indian Napolean? 
(a) Chandragupta Il 
(a) Kalidasa : Raghuvamsha 
(c) Shudraka : Mrichchhakatikam 
6. Choose the wrong pair : (b) Samudragupta 
5. Which of the following is a collection of fables? 
(a) Amarkosha (b) Kiratarjunia 
(a) Aryabhatta : Aryabhattiyam EXERCISES 
4. The book 'Dashkumarcharita' describes the adventure of: 
(a) Ten princes (b) Ten robbers 
(c) Brahmagupta : Brahmashutika Siddhanta 
7. Who patronised famous "Nav Ratnas"? 
(a) Samudragupta 
(a) Only (i) and (ii) (b) Vikramaditya 
9. Which of the following statement is/are correct? 
(b) Only (ii) 
(a) There were many pathshalas or schools 
1End Civics -IX [COMPETENCY-FocUSED QUESTION] [RECALL & ANALYSIS] 
(c) (). (i), (ii) 
8. Which language was the Court Language of Guptas? 
(a) Hindi (b) English (c) Chandraguptal 
(O) The Gupta issued a large number of gold coins (b) Vishakhadatta : Mudrarakshasa 
(d) Bharavi : Ravana Vadha 
(c) Panchatantra (c) Ten unmarried youngmen (d) Ten warriors 
(c) Brahmagupta 
(b) Many students were educated in the universities (d) only (ii) and (ii) 
(c) Sanskrit (d) Sri Gupta 
[COMPETENCY-FocusED QUESTION] [RECALL] 
(c) Only (i) and (ii) aryo 
(d) Brihatkatha Kosh 
[COMPETENCY-FocuSED QUESTION] [RECALL] 
(b) Varahamihira : Surya Siddhanta 
(d) Varahamihira : Brihat Samhita 
(d) Chandragupta 
(d) Marathi (RECALL 
() Vaghbhatta and Dhanavantari were physicians (i) Varahamihira was great mathematician and astronomer 
(i) Shudraka was a great dramatist 
(d) (0). (i) and (ii) [RECALL] 
[RECALL] 
[RECALL] 
10. India made great progress in the field of education during the Gupta period.' VWhich of the following statements 
correctly describes the same? [RECALL] 
[ANALYSIs] 
(C) There were many universities like Nalanda, Taxila and Sarnath where even foreign students flocked to 
receive higher education [UNDERSTANDING] 
133 

--- Page 12 ---

11. ldentify the reasons why Vishnu temple at Deogarh marked a transition from earlier temples. 
nstead of fat-roofed temples now a Shikhara was built over the Garbhagriha. 
QThis temple is erected on a platform which Is decorated with sculptures based on the 
SCenes torm Ramayana and Mahabharata. R: Ajanta cavesillustrate the great advancement that the Guptas had made in the field of architecture 
S The brick temple at Bhitragaon is another fine specimen of the Gupta period. 
(a) P and Q 
12. Read the two statements given below about Kalidasa. Select the option that shows the correct relaiong, [COMPETENCY-FocUSED QUESTION between (A) and (B). 
(A) : He is rightly called the 'Shakespeare of India. (b) Q and R 
(a) (B) contradicts (A) 
(c) (A) is true but (B) is false (0) Kalidasa's plays and poetrv have been translated into various languages of the world 
(a) Inverted lotus built at the top 
(b) Polished stone with lustre 13. What is the most significant aspect of the given plcture. [COMPETENCY-FocuSED QUESTION) 
1. (c) 2. (b) 3. (d) 
11. (a) 12. (b) 13. (c) (c) R and S 
VERY SHORT ANSWER QUESTIONS 4. (a) (c) Rustless wonder showing art of metallurgy reaching the pinnacie 
(d) The statue of Buddha at the top of pillar (b) (B) is the reason for (A) 
134 (d) (A) and (B) are independent of each other 
[COMPETENCY-FocuSED QUESTION] [APPLICATION & ANALYSIS] 
ANSWERS 
5. (c) 6. (b) 
4. Name two centres of learning during the Gupta period. (d) P and S 
5. Which sciences flourished during the Gupta period? 7. (b) 
1. Who was Fa-Hien, and during whose reign did he visit India? 
2. Who were the two great grammarians of the Gupta period? 
3. Read the following excerpt and answer the question that follows: [COMPETENCY-FocUSED QUESTION] [RECAL 
"After declaring his independence in Magadha, he with the help of a matrimonial alliance with the Lichchas 
enlarged his kingdom." (Source: https:/legyankosh.ac.in/bitstream/123456789/20162/1/Unit 32 pd 
Whom did Chandragupta I marry to strengthen his rule? 
6. What distinguished the Gupta governance from the Mauryan governance? 8. (c) 9. (d) 10. (0 
[RECAL 
Name the three greatest mathematicians and astronomers of the Gupta period. [RECAL 
[RECAL 
[RECA 
7. Read the following excerpt and answer the question that followS: [COMPETENCY-FocuSED QUESTION) |KE 
"It was an intensely active period in mathematics which encouraged the development of astronomy as a pe 
science." [ANALYSS 
(Source: htps://zh. unesco.org/silkroad/sites/default/files/knowledgebankarticle/vol_ I19%20silk?%20r0a0. 
gupta%20kingdom.pdf) 
ICSE History and Civics 

--- Page 13 ---

Where are the best specimens of the Gupta paintings found? 
two groat physicians of the Gupta period. 
Gupta king was known as Vikramaditya? 
What was the main source of income in the Gupta Ermpire? 
Name any two members of tho "Nav Ratnas" from Chandragupta ll's court. 
ORT ANSWER QUESTIONS 
1. Road the following excorpt and answer the questions that follow: 
aupta %2Okingdom,pd) 
(a) What does this suggest about religious art during the Gupta period? 
(b) What were the main religions practised during the Gupta period as per Fa-Hien's accOunts? The Hindu gods, as represented in the sculpture of this period, were mainly incarnations of Vishnu, the rmost 
popular among them being those of nrsimha (half man/half lion) and varaha (boa)." 
(Sourco: https://zh. unesco. org/slkroad/sites/defaul/files/knowledgebankarticle/vol II1%20slk%20road tho %20 
2. What was the main focus of education at Nalanda University? 
3. What is the importance of the 'Panchtantra'? 
4 Who were the first two rulers of the Gupta dynasty, and why is their history significant? 
gupta %2Okingdom.pd) 
a) Which regions did Chandragupta ll annex after defeating the Sakas? 
(b) What title did Chandragupta Il earn for these conquests? 
E What is the importance of the Allahabad Pillar Inscríption 2 
7. Give one great work of each of the following: 
(a) Vishakhadatta [COMPETENCY-FocUSED QUESTION] [UNDERSTANDING & RECALLJ 
poad the folloWing eXCerpt and answer the questions that follow: rCoMPETENCY-FocUSED QUESTION] [RECALLJ 
mhe Dev1 Chandraguptam, however, points to the fact that Chandragupta Ils major campaign was fought against 
Sakas. The Udaygiri cave inscription of Virasena, Chandragupta il's minister of war and peace, records that 
Chandragupta came with him to that region to 'conquer the whole world', referring to the Saka wars. 
Source: htps:/zh.unesco.org/silkroad'sites/defaut/fles/knowledgebankarticle/vol_19%20silk ?% 20road the %20 
(b) Bhasa 
9. Discuss the contribution of Sushruta in mnedicine. A How can you say that the Gupta period made great progress in the field of metallurgy? 
NG ANSWER QUESTIONS (c) Banabhatta 
10. What was Samudragupta's most significant military campaign? 
11. Why is the painting of Avalokiteshvera Padmapani so famous? [RECALLJ 
[REGALLJ 
[RRCALLJ 
a) Why is Fa-Hien's account considered a valuable source for understanding the Gupta period? 
) How did his accounts highlight the religious and cultural tolerance of the time? 
1C What role did such foreign accounts play in reconstructing Indian history? 
CvicsX (RECALLJ 
ad the lines given below and answer the question that follows: (RECALL 
[RECALL 
[ANALYSIs] 
[RECALL] 
[ANALYsis] 
1. Fa-Hien documented the social and economic conditions of India during the Gupta period. With reference to 
this, answer the following questions: [RECALL] 
[RECALL & UNDERSTANDING] [ANALYSis] 
[ANALYSis] 
[UNDERsTANDING] 
(ANALYsis] 
(CoMPETENCY-FocuSED QUESTION] [ANALYSIS & UNDERSTANDING] 
le lands in eastern Uttar Pradesh and Bihar and abundant iron ore in Central India. the Gupta Empire ved economically. fostering remarkable advancements in literature. art architecture science. and culture 
135 

--- Page 14 ---

(a) Explain how the geographical advantages contributed to the economic prosperity of the 
Gupla 
Empire (b) Discuss the cultural and intellectual achievements during the Gupta period, highlighting why i 
"golden age" of Indian history. 
(C) How did the stable administration of the Gupta rulers influence trade and commerce? 
3. Read the following excerpt and answer the questions that follows: 
406 "A lengthy eulogy to Samudragupta (who ruled until c. 375) was inscribed on an Asokan pillar at 
Alaha that provides detailed information about his military achievements and lists the names of the states and conquered by him." 
gupta %2Okingdom.pdf) (Source: https://zh. unesco.org/silkroad/sites/default/files/knowledgebankarticle/vol 1%20silk%20road 
he' (COMPETENCY-FocUSED QUESTION] 
(a) Who was Harisena, and what does his work reveal about Samudragupta's conquests? 
(b) Why is this inscription considered a critical source for understanding the Gupta Empire? 
ancient history. (C) Compare the importance of inscriptions with other sources, such as coins and toreign accounts, for 
questions : 4. The Guptas achieved remarkable advancements in art and culture. With reference to this, answer the follo 
(a) What are the main characteristics of Gupta sculpture? 
(b) How do the Ajanta paintings reflect the artistic excellence of the Gupta period? [RECALL 
(c) Compare the Bagh and Ajanta paintings in terms of style and themes. 
5. With reference to the picture given below answer the following questions &ANAL 
[COMPETENCY-FocUSED QUESTIONJ RECALL 8& UNDERSTAln 
Scan this QR Code for more questions based on (a) ldentify the monument shown in the image and describe its historical significance during the Gupta peitr 
(b) Name some of the foreign countries from which students came to study at Nalanda. 
this chapter, along with their solutions [RECALL & ANALIN 
(c) What were the names of the three great libraries? Discuss the importance of these libraries in presen 
and advancing knowledge during the Gupta period. 
CODELom 
ICSE History and Ciis 