CULTURAL DEVELOPMENTS

The Gupta rulers were not only great generals and able administrators
but also patrons of art and literature. Under them, India saw
advancement in all the fields of culture—literature, science, sculpture,
fine arts etc., as it had not seen before. That is why their period is
regarded as a ‘Golden Period’ in the History of Ancient India.

Advancement in the Field of Literature This period is particularly
renowned for advancement in literature. Sanskrit saw its revival during
this period. Sanskrit became more prominent in Gupta times, especially
in the courts and classical literature, while Pali was still widely used
in Buddhist scriptures.

Many great poets, dramatists, grammarians and scholars lived in the
period. The chief among them were the following: 1. Kalidasa: He was the
greatest poet and playwright of this age. He is often referred to as the
‘Shakespeare of India.’ He wrote several poems and dramas in Sanskrit
which are considered the gems of literature. His great skill in lyrical
poetry is exhibited in his poems Meghaduta and Ritusamhara while
Kumarasambhava and Raghuvamsha are his two great epics. Kalidasa’s plays
have also been translated into various languages of the world. The most
important among them are Abhijnanshakuntalam, Vikramorvashiya and
Malavikagnimitra. 2. Vishakhadatta: He was a great playwright who wrote
two great historical plays Mudrarakshasa and the Devi Chandraguptam.
Mudrarakshasa or ‘Seal of Rakshasa’ is the story of the circumstances
that led to the accession of Chandragupta Maurya to the throne of
Magadha. 3. Shudraka: He wrote the famous Mrichchhakatikam or the ‘Clay
Cart’ which is a great source of information about the socio-economic
conditions of that period. 4. Other Poets, Dramatists and Playwrights:
Among the other great poets and playwrights of this period were Harisena
who wrote the famous poem praising the valour of his master,
Samudragupta. It is a gem of Sanskrit poetry and is inscribed on the
Allahabad Pillar. Bharavi and Bhatti were also great poets and
playwrights. Kiratarjuniyam of Bharavi describes the battle between
Arjuna, the Pandava hero, and Lord Shiva, disguised as Kirata. Bhasa
wrote 13 plays, of which Swapna-Vasavadatta or the ‘Dream of Princess
Vasavadatta’ and Pratigya Yogandharayana are the most popular. Ravana
Vadha or the ‘Assassination of Ravana’ written by Bhatti is also a
masterpiece of literature. Dandin was also a versatile writer, and his
Dashakumaracharita describes the adventures of ten princes in lucid
prose. These adventures provide us a lot of information about the social
condition of that period. During the Gupta period, the Sanskrit grammar
was systematised by the efforts of grammarians like Patanjali and
lexicographers such as Amar Simha. Patanjali’s Mahabhashya and
Amarsimha’s Amarakosha are the most celebrated works of its kind.
Panchatantra, a collection of animal stories, in which animals and birds
play the parts of kings, ministers and common men, is full of wit and
humour. It is said that Vishnu Sharma wrote these fables to preach the
art of statecraft to disinterested princes. Subsequently, these fables
were adopted as Aesop’s Fables. Another book Brihat Katha by Gunadhya
became the basis of ‘Sindbad the Sailor.’

Advancement in the Field of Science The science of medicine, mathematics
and astronomy reached great heights during the Gupta period. Medicine:
Vagbhata was the most distinguished physician of this period. He wrote
his famous treatise Ashtangahridaya Samhita and continued the tradition
of Charaka. In this period, surgeons performed operations of cataract,
etc. Dhanvantari was also a great physician whose name has become
synonymous with medical science. Astang-Sangraha, Charaka-Samhita and
Sushruta Samhita were other important works on Ayurveda. Sushruta was
the first surgeon of ancient India. Charaka was a great physician who
lived at Taxila during the reign of Kanishka. Sushruta: Sushruta wrote
Sushruta Samhita, which was one of the most important treatises on
medicine. This treatise explains all aspects of general medicine
including detailed account of surgery. Sushruta is called ‘father of
plastic surgery’. Sushruta had a number of disciples who were required
to study for 6 years before beginning surgical training. He would
instruct students to practise cutting on vegetables or dead animals to
perfect the length and depth of an incision. Sushruta’s medical prowess
is exhibited through his writings on rhinoplasty, involving nasal
reconstructions using skin from patient’s cheek or forehead.

Mathematics and Astronomy: The greatest mathematicians and astronomers
of this period were Aryabhatta, Varahamihira and Brahmagupta. By this
time, Indian mathematicians had already discovered the decimal system
and the use of zero which were later borrowed by Arabs from India.
Aryabhatta, in his famous book Aryabhatiyam, deals with rules of solving
problems of Algebra, Geometry and Trigonometry. He even calculated the
exact value of π (pi) which was equal to 3.1416 and formulated how to
find the area of a triangle. Aryabhatta’s other book, Surya Siddhanta,
proves that the earth revolves round the sun and rotates on its axis. In
this way he discovered the causes of the Solar and the Lunar eclipses.
He also measured by speculation the exact circumference of the earth.
Varahamihira’s celebrated work is known as Brihat Samhita. It deals with
mathematics, astronomy, botany and physical geography. He stated that
the moon moves round the earth and the earth together with the moon,
moves round the sun. He also worked on the movement of the planets. His
other works are Panch Siddhantika, Brihad Jataka and Laghu Jataka.
Brahmagupta was also a great mathematician. His work Brahmashutika
Siddhanta is composed in verse form. He hints at the law of gravitation.

Sculpture and Fine Arts In the field of Sculpture, India made
significant progress under the Guptas, leading to the decline of
Gandhara art. The Gupta sculptures show an exquisite beauty of execution
and a high degree of skill. Both the art and the subjects chosen became
completely Indian in their character. The discovery of a large number of
images and sculptures at Sarnath and various other places shows that
besides depicting scenes from Buddha’s life, now subjects from Puranic
mythology had also begun to be treated with remarkable freshness.

Architecture The Gupta period also saw great advancement in the field of
Architecture. Numerous beautiful temples with the Shikhara were built
during this period. The stone temple at Deogarh (near Jhansi) and the
brick temple at Bhitargaon (near Kanpur) are two fine specimens of the
period. The first contains some fine pieces of sculpture on the panels
of its walls and the second is known for its well-designed figures in
terracotta. The Vishnu temple at Deogarh marked a transition from early
flat-roofed temples to the later style of building a Shikhara or a tower
over the shrine of the Chief deity (Garbha-grha). This temple is erected
on a platform accessible by a flight of steps. This platform is
decorated with sculptures depicting scenes from the lives of Rama and
Krishna. A remarkable figure shows Hanuman carrying the whole hill.

Paintings The art of painting reached its height of glory and splendour
during the Gupta Age. The specimens of the Gupta paintings are found at
Ajanta and the Bagh caves. The best specimens of the Ajanta paintings
are represented by the beautiful frescoes found in the Ajanta caves.
These frescoes are so excellent in their design and technical skill that
tourists from all over the world especially come to see them. The words
of a Danish artist are worth mentioning in this connection. According to
him, “They represent the climax which the genuine Indian art has
attained. Everything in these pictures from the composition as a whole
to the smallest pearl or flower testifies the depth of insight coupled
with the greatest technical skill.” These frescoes of the Ajanta caves
are accomplished in execution and beautiful in form and colour. Perhaps
the figure of Avalokiteshvara Padmapani is the best known single figure
from Ajanta found in Cave No. 1. This figure is as much known for its
colours and designs as for its expression. The face of the figure
clearly reflects compassion and tenderness which is characteristic of
Padmahari whose main mission is to relieve human beings by taking upon
himself the sufferings of earthly beings. The figure is set in quite a
natural setting. It is surrounded by Gandharvas, Yakshas, Apsaras and
other celestial beings, animals (like monkeys) and trees (like palm
trees). The head-dressing or jewelled crown, necklace and white lotus in
the right hand, all add much lustre to the whole scene, especially to
the figures of Padmahari or the Lotus-Bearer. The paintings in Bagh
Caves (Madhya Pradesh) are similar to those of Ajanta. They have the
same variety of designs, vigorous execution, decorative quality and
secular nature. The scene depicting a procession of elephants and a
lovely scene of a dancer and woman musicians are very impressive
compositions.

Metal Casting or Metallurgy The art of casting metals reached a high
degree of development during the Gupta age. The Iron Pillar at Delhi,
near the Qutub Minar, is the best example of the metallurgical skill of
the Gupta artists. It has been exposed to sun, rain and storms for
centuries yet it has not rusted. One may wonder how the ancient Indians
were able to cast such a massive and heavy pillar in the 5th century CE.
This pillar has a special historical importance of its own. This pillar
bears the inscription of King Chandra who has been identified by the
historians as Chandragupta Vikramaditya. It is believed that this iron
pillar was erected by Kumargupta to commemorate the achievements of his
father Chandragupta Vikramaditya. The copper statue of Buddha in Nalanda
and the Sultanganj Buddha statue, which is about 2.5 metres in height
and weighs over 500 kilograms is the best specimen of copper sculpture
of the Gupta period. The coins of the Gupta rulers also display a high
artistic value too. They issued a large number of gold coins.

Education India made great progress in the field of education during the
Gupta period. In addition to the existence of a large number of
Pathshalas or high schools there were many universities like Nalanda,
Taxila, Sarnath and Ajanta which were ever busy for imparting higher
education to the ‘sisyas’ or students. Students from all parts of India
and from many foreign countries flocked to these universities receive
higher education. These educational institutions were maintained by the
grants of land and charities of the common public. It was during the
Gupta period that the foundation of the Nalanda University was laid
which later on achieved great heights.
